North Korea, China, and Cuba was greatly enhanced
by the demonstration of total freedom that those
people demonstrated throughout the world. And I
don't think it's going to be long until North Korea
and China and Cuba, the Communist parties, will
lose power.
Why do you feel that the anti-war activists were
against the war? Well, I say, I don't think they
were against the war. They were against
everything. There was what was called a Chicago
Five. I don't remember all of them. Jerry Rubin was
one of the major ones. But they were a group of
hippies that really was the leadership in all the
drug experimentation and so forth and there was a
professor who's still out at the university of
california the lsd king i forget yeah leary
timothy o'leary although i think he was at the
school in boston at that time he subsequently
moved to california they were a group of people
that was against everything and the war just
happened to be there and if it hadn't been a war they
would have been against something. Now, I
attended some congressional hearings while
these people were being questioned. And they're
absolutely the scum of the earth. You would not
believe how they were. And like I say, they were
against everything. Now, there were some people
there who truly were against They thought the
United States was wrong. And these people I have no
problem with. They have a right to believe one way
or the other. But my judgment is that was probably
10 or 15%. The rest of them were professional
antagonists.
They were against everything.
And this was just a good cause. They were not
employed. I don't know how they supported
themselves. There certainly was no significant
economic support base for these people. A lot of
the rock music was getting to be big, big things.
And they were having big, well, I think Woodstock
was one of them. But this is where they gathered
their people from. They were able to get a group of
people. And college students always have been and
always will be very easy to get emotionally
involved in things. Fortunately, we've always
managed to get this emotional energy involved in a
positive direction.
And as a result of that, much good has been done by
the youth of this country over the years. But when
you get the wrong leaders
involved like they did at that period of time, they
can be a tremendous force. Large numbers of
people, rather than being drafted, went to Canada
and other places. But Canada was the primary place
that avoid the draft. But it was just a situation
where we had leadership
that could take advantage of the emotion of the
youth that were simply leading them in the
anti-war direction because there just happened
to be a war.
How'd you feel about soldiers that came back and
started becoming involved with the anti-war
movement? Well, there again, particularly, you
know, there are young men we're talking about
here. Well, first of all, some of them truly
believed that what we were doing was wrong. And
their experience may very well have been a very bad
experience. You know, I told you to begin with.
This sort of thing is a very subjective thing. Now,
nothing that I was involved with while I was in
Vietnam was bad. There were no atrocities where my
unit was involved with. We did not treat the people
badly. I had absolutely no reason whatsoever to
come back here and not feel pride in having done a
good job and having done what our government
wanted us to do. Now, if I had been in an outfit like
was involved in some of these massacres, like
Lieutenant Kelly, I'm sure you've read about
this, but probably don't know the full extent of
it, then yeah, I probably could have been coaxed
into demonstrating against the United States
because that was bad. And so anyone that was
involved in bad
situations was going to be very likely
subject to being recruited into the anti-war. I
read General Schwarzkopf's. novel, not novel,
autobiography. I don't know whether you read it or
not. But he was a battalion commander about the
same time that I was. And he talked in not very
flowery terms about the condition of the
battalion that he was in. It was bad. And he said so.
It had bad leaders. And the people probably were
involved in some bad things. So I can understand
how a young private who spent a year in a situation
like that would have come back very demoralized.
And I don't mean that as a slap at the Army, OK?
Because the Army had to mobilize from a relatively
small force with worldwide responsibilities.
into a very large force who still had its worldwide
primarily European responsibilities and then
still had to provide a large force for Vietnam. As a
result of that, I believe Gerald Schwarzkopf
indicated that he only had two or three NCOs in his
entire battalion that had combat experience.
His officers were were very inexperienced. Now
you take the battalion I was in now. We had staff
NCOs, many of which had Korean experience. I had
been to Korea.
I guess I was the only officer that had Korean
experience. I can't recall. Yeah, I'm sure I was.
But My company commanders, platoon commanders
and so forth, were top quality.
As a result of that, we didn't have disciplinary
problems. We did not have problems with dope,
which General Schwarzkopf wrote about, which
many other people have talked to me about. We
didn't have all those problems. And as a result,
Not only was my experience a positive one, but the
experience of the troopers were positive. So I
would be shocked if any of them were involved at our
war movement. But the other young people who had
lesser quality experiences, yeah. You see, I left
there and went to Army staff in the Pentagon. My
contemporaries there were Army officers. And the
experiences that they shared with me
were quite similar to what General Schwarzkopf
said about his unit. And when I would relate my
experiences to them, they couldn't believe it.
They would tell me about the so-called fragging
that used to go on. We didn't have any problems like
that.
We talk about the discipline where our lack of
discipline, where young soldiers would refuse
orders. We didn't have that sort of stuff.
And like I say, one of the reasons that the Army had
this problem is they had to expand so quickly They
had to take so many draftees that their training
base did not allow them to train these people
properly. They were not able to provide enough
experienced officers and non-commissioned
officers to the units in Vietnam. And as a result,
it was often terrible, absolutely terrible. Like
I said, fortunately, we didn't I'll bet you that
half of the staff NCOs in my battalion were on their
second tour in Vietnam and many of them on their
third tour.
So they knew what was going on and so forth. But a lot
of that has to do with leadership from the top. Now,
when I say the top, Really, I think the last level of
command that has a direct influence on the soldier
or Marine is the battalion commander. The
regimental brigade or division commander, he'll
have some influence over the battalion
commander, but first of all, never is going to get
around the troopers.
I think that because we had fewer commitments
worldwide than the Army did, we were able to have a
higher quality battalion commander. Now, just as
an example, I recall I had sent a patrol one day out
through this village and they had to They were to go
out about 10 or 12 kilometers and come back. And
this was a platoon-sized patrol, about 40 men. As
they were going through this village, for some
unknown reason, they passed this Buddhist
temple. And they started breaking the cups and so
forth, cups and saucers that were on the outside of
this temple.
The lieutenant who was in command of the platoon
didn't stop him. Well, the word got back to me as to
what happened. And I made him buy plates and
saucers to replace. It cost him $250 to replace
them. And so the word gets out, not only can you not
kill innocent people the way They were in some
places. You can't even destroy their property,
because if you do, this guy's going to make you pay
for it.
And when you control troops, when they do what you
want them to and do not do the wrong thing, well,
first of all, you never have any massacres. You
don't kill innocent women and children.
It's just a matter of respect for being in one's
country and so forth. And I just don't think many
Army units had experiences like that. And I say
this because, like I say, I was stationed with them
after I left, and they
just couldn't believe that that we operate this
way and they operate it in a totally different
manner.
What types of training did you have to go through in
order to work in civil disturbances? Well, there
wasn't any, you mean for me personally, there was
nothing. You know, they just, I had orders to go to
headquarters Marine Corps and I don't even
remember now what branch I was scheduled to go to.
And the day I got there, they said, no, you're not
going there. You're going to go and be on the Army
staff. I said, why me? Well, they give me this cock
and bull story about all my qualifications. And I
finally told them, I said, this is a bunch of BS. Why
am I going over there? They said, they want someone
right now, and you're the first one coming in. So we
got through all this qualification bit. And I was
just an able body to go over there and represent the
Marine Corps. Of course, by the same token, at this
point I had 20 years in the Marine Corps, so I was
completely familiar with all of our organization
capabilities and so forth, and I had served in
many, many positions, so I was able to help in the
planning that we had to do. Now, as far as the people
that we utilized in civil disturbances, we did put
them through riot control training
and lots of other things because the idea when
you're involved in this sort of thing is to
accomplish your mission without using any more
force than was absolutely necessary.
Also, we were involved in the training, testing,
and monitoring of all your National Guard and
Reserve units at the time. And that's what took up
most of our efforts, was trying to see that they
were ready to do it. See, there's a law in the United
States called Posse Comitatus Act, which says, in
effect, that regular forces cannot be used to
enforce the law, except when the governor of a
state tells the president, I need help. Now, the
basis of that is good. It's to keep the armed forces
from being used in any way which could maybe give
them an insight as to how to take over the
government?
Now, the irony of it is that the Marine Corps is
exempted from that act. So actually, Marines can
be used in a law enforcement mode, whereas the Army
cannot.
But fortunately, the requirement was on the wane.
by the time I got there. We thought it was going to
get worse, but actually we had already seen the
worst part of it by the time I got to Washington. Did
your training change or how did it change over the
three years that you worked in civil
disturbances? The training that soldiers went
through to work? Yes, it did. The emphasis was on
riot control. And it was how to move various
formations that would be used to move a group of
people out of an area. A wedge, for instance. A
wedge is the way you split a piece of wood. Well,
that's the way you break up a group of rioters or
demonstrators, is you split them into more
usable, not usable, but controllable size
groups. The use of tear gas and other things, the
billy club, non-deadly force was stressed. But
almost everything else that a soldier or a Marine
does in his regular training is also quite usable
in civil disturbances. But one of the basic
mistakes and the most,
well, I'm looking for a word. I can't find it. But on
Kent State, I don't know whether you've read
anything on that or not. Now, this was National
Guard. This was not Army. This was National Guard.
Forces were used there. The truth of the matter is
they panicked. And they started shooting live
ammunition at demonstrators. That should never
happen. But it goes back to the basic problem that I
discussed earlier, and that is the fact that the
Army and its extension as the National Guard was
poorly, poorly trained, poorly organized,
poorly led to the point of almost being criminally
You have to realize, though, how a National Guard
works. And I want to be quick to say the National
Guard today is 20 times better than it was then.
And each state is different. But I don't think
there was a single state that could say theirs was
good then or that was properly led. It was
politically led. These people, a large
percentage of the people and all of the leadership
were politically appointed. For instance, it
wouldn't be unusual at all to find the adjutant
general, who is the commander of the state's
National Guard, to have been a captain in the Guard
one day, and the right governor takes over, and the
next day he's a major general in the Guard. Well,
just because you pin stars on his shoulder doesn't
make him any more qualified today than he was
yesterday when he had captain's bars on his
shoulder. Quite the contrary, he probably was a
pure politician or he wouldn't have had that kind
of pull with the government. The National Guard
then, and they were the first line of defense, was
terrible. There's no other way to state it. They
were terrible. They were ill-equipped,
ill-trained, ill-organized, and it was just a bad
scene. And in Kent State, there were several
people killed. And it was demonstrated to a lesser
degree numerous times throughout. The National
Guard has improved vastly.
Did your views on Vietnam change when you were
there the first time in 67 to when you participated
in the evacuation in 75? No. I believe that we were
there. Now, when I say we, I was there as a Marine.
Now, why we as a nation was there, that's another
matter. And you need to keep that in perspective. A
professional military man is there and doing
something because his commander in chief told him
to.
And he doesn't have to agree totally with his
commander in chief. He just has to do what he's
told.
I believe that our reason for going there was
honorable.
I believe that there were truly political
mistakes that were made.
There were military mistakes that were made.
But anyone who waits until he finds a perfect
situation before he is involved will never be
involved in anything.
I believe we were right being there. I believe we
did a professional job. I believe that the
decisions to restrict military activity was a
political decision. I believe those decisions
should be political. And when the political
decision is made by the commander in chief, and he
says, this is what we're going to do, then it is the
job of the military to do it. And it should always be
that way. The military should never, ever, ever be
the controlling factor. They should never, ever,
ever make political decisions. They should
always be consulted and asked for advice, but they
should never, ever make political decisions.
That's how you get a Russia.
That's how you get several other communist
countries.
No, to answer your question, my view did not
change. I went back there in 1975 under orders of
the command in chief to evacuate those people. We
did a good job. I would not do it differently. I felt
proud the first time I left there. I felt proud the
second time I left there. We did what we were told to
do with the absolute minimum loss of life. And when
you can walk away saying we've done the job and we
have lost the absolute minimum number of people,
then you have no reason to be anything other than
proud.
Describe your role in the evacuation of Saigon and
Laos. Well, my role in Laos was strictly one of
being a reserve battalion.
I was not called upon. We stayed aboard the
aircraft carrier ready to go, but we were not
needed. My role in the evacuation of Saigon was
that I was to go in and occupy the location where the
CIA had operated out of.
Another battalion was to go into the embassy, and a
third battalion was to be the reserve. We were
getting ready to launch. I already had one company
that was airborne. I was in the helicopter myself
and was getting ready to lift off. And the pilot
said, hey, the captain wants to see you. We've been
told to stand down. Well, the bottom line was the
CIA area, which was called Air America, that was
their cover, had been lost to the North
Vietnamese. And so the choice had to be made,
either we're going to not use that as an evacuation
point, or I was going to have to go in there and
retake it. In other words, I was going to have to
make an assault on the plane. Well, the decision
was made that we would not do that, and it was a good
decision. I don't take exception to that. So there
again, I sat as the reserve battalion aboard the
aircraft carrier Hancock waiting to go in if
needed and i did not go in so my participation was
strictly one of handling the evacuees as they come
back to the ship that i was on now i had troops on two
other ships and i did have one platoon which was
airborne the entire time as just a ready reserve
that could go in in the event a helicopter went down
or something, that they could go in and secure the
site until whatever additional evacuation was
necessary. But
we took care of them. people as they came back and
that was the full extent of it. So I was just a
reserve battalion in both of those operations.
Describe your feelings about the evacuation and
if it was a defeat for the Marine Corps. Oh,
definitely not a defeat. We come out of there under
orders.
And I might add that if you looked at that
operation, if you studied that operation,
I would say that there was one mistake made. And
that was one of
a pilot who had been, again,
an aircraft that was on standby in the event
another aircraft went down.
That crew had been airborne over 12 hours on that
particular day. And fortunately, we had not lost
any other aircraft. Not another aircraft had gone
down. So he had been simply a standby aircraft for
12 hours. He had landed two or three times to
refuel. He'd come back out to the ship to land and
refuel. But other than that, he'd been airborne.
And, oh, I guess it was an hour after dark. I don't
remember when the operation had, in fact, been
completed. He was coming back in to our carrier to
land. And he simply drove that helicopter into the
city. And the pilots have a term for this. They
understood what happened.
He was fixed on the lights of the carrier. And after
a while, your eyes fool you is what he came out to do.
He truly thought he was landing on the aircraft
carrier, and he drove it into the water about 400
yards off him. And even though that helicopter was
supposed to float, it went down like a sea anchor,
and all four men were killed. Now that was the...